[Contrarian knocks on the door. Apologist answers.]
          Contrarian: Greetings! Might I ask whether you've an opinion on abortion?
          Apologist: As it happens, I've thought about the issue a little, yes.
          C: My friend, the situation hardly bears just thinking on; what this holocaust demands is action! Accept abortion is evil and institutionalized murder of humanity, and let's being discussing what we can do about it.
          A: Now hold on - I never said I thought abortion is a bad thing. On first glance, it looks pretty good: it's a tremendous aid to family planning; it reduces the problem of out-of-control population growth; it compensates for imperfect birth control; it can save the lives of women, and so on. Besides the inherent risks, what's so bad about it?
         C: Didn't I already say what was wrong? Millions of humans have been killed by abortion procedures! The sum of deaths is now far past anything the Nazis dreamed of; as we allow time to pass with this horrific practice uncurbed, even Stalin and Mao's body-counts will be overshadowed. Abortion is nothing but clinicalized murder of a human being!
         A: But are they?
         C: Are who what?
         A: Fetuses, I mean. Are they really human beings?
         C: Of course they are. 2 cells from 2 humans unite inside the human woman, they swell and grow inside her, they come out of that human, they are called a human, live a human life, and eventually die still a human. When exactly would they not be a human?
         A: Well, it's just that when I look at a fetus in its 1st trimester, I don't see much 'human' there. It's just a blob of cells sitting there growing, looking like fetuses of a lot of other mammalian species. It doesn't think, it doesn't feel - it doesn't do anything I recognize as uniquely human. Heck, it 'does' so little that it can't exist except as a parasite on the woman, and even as a parasite it's pretty pathetic.
         C: It may just be a blob of cells, but it's a blob of cells with human DNA, from and inside a human. That's what makes all the world of difference compared with (say) a tapeworm.
         A: I'm not sure we can equate being human as having the same DNA as other humans. What about a tumor? Each tumor has fully human DNA, is inside a human and of that human, and so as far as I can see is just as human as your fetus. For that matter, tumors can weigh dozens of pounds - does that mean a giant tumor is more human by many multiples? If so, then I guess your claims about a holocaust understated the magnitude, if anything!
        C: Well, cancers arise of genetic mutations, do they not?
        A: That's no good: some cancers are hereditary. Besides if just 1 or 2 genetic changes suffice to render nonhuman, then you've just defined gene therapy as tantamount to murder.
        C: That's well-said, but I have to deny the analogy. It's true that tumors are made of cells with human DNA, but they're no more human than an E. Coli in my gut which swaps for some human DNA with another, or a gorilla or chimpanzee who both have more than 90% of our DNA, or for that matter, rice and bananas with around 50%! No, the key attribute you're missing is the potential. A fetus has potential to grow into something we both accept as human. No matter how many E. Colis you culture or tumors suffer to grow, you'll never see one turn into a human being.
        A: So what would be a fair characterization? Something is a human being if it's obviously a human being, or has human DNA and is going to become a human in the future?
        C: Fair enough.
        A: But fetuses still wouldn't meet. Most fetuses wind up being shed, or just dying, or are so damaged they never come to term. There's a chance they'll become human, but the cumulative odds are low.
        C: Many things in life are low odds. Let's just say 'is possible for it to become a human being'. That certainly sounds reasonable to me. If you accept that, then you must condemn abortion!
        A: I can't be so enthusiastic. Let me offer an illustration of my misgivings. Suppose we take a normal woman from her suburban existence. Let's call her Sherry Tiavo. We anesthetize Sherry, crack open her skull, and take an ice cream scoop to her until all that's left is her spinal cord and brain steam. To be sure, we toss the brains into the incinerator. Is Sherry (or her body) still human? Are we guilty of murder?
        C: Well... clearly the mind is irretrievably gone. You can't regrow a brain. But people would still react to her as a human being - the issue is obvious to them - so I would say yes to both.
        A: Suppose we then secretly hired a mad cosmetic surgeon, and we order him to transform her body into something nonhuman. Perhaps a humanoid cat; I don't know. But now if they happened to come across it, her own family no longer recognizes her as human - much less as their Sherry. What then?
        C: I know the answer you expect - 'No, since nobody treats her as human, and she certainly has no future potential.'
        A: Since the body is no longer human, but something 'lower', something animal at best, surely it follows we can do anything to it that we could do to an animal. We could kill it, butcher it, conduct all sorts of experiments on it, abandon it in the woods...
        C: Stop! Stop! Alright, maybe the obvious-and-potential criterion isn't acceptable to me after all.
        A: Well, how do you suggest we modify it? You can't abandon the potentiality criterion without also abandoning fetuses, remember.
        C: Then I'll drop the 'obvious' criterion. It was wrong of me to accept that in the first place: this very discussion is proof that we can't rely on agreement as to what is a human. This criterion covers adults (as obviously one has the potential to become human merely by inertia), and fetuses, but properly excludes tumors and chimeric bacteria.
        A: I am not normally a disagreeable person, but there must be something in the air today. Abandoning the appeal to social judgement as part of your personhood criteria seems to me to be quite as wrong as affirming it.
        C: A strong claim. May I ask for an example of how 'potential' on its own could go so astray?
        A: Certainly. But I have some preliminary points. Now, you accept that on the level of individual cells and suchlike, everything is determined by physical laws and starting conditions, yes?
        C: Yes.
        A: By which I mean, an embryo or zygote (which grow into the fetus) is an extremely complex agglomeration of chemicals or atoms in a particular arrangement. If I were to manufacture another such agglomeration, identical down to the molecular level, what I would get is a zygote or embryo which is very similar (if not identical) to the original?
        C: Yes. No doubt there would be differences as the cells grew, ways in which the imperfect replication interacted with the varying conditions to produce varying results. If you were not artful enough, the agglomeration might not even be alive.
        A: But if I were, it would grow and develop?
        C: Yes. I am no Luddite who believes in a vital fluid or some such foolishness. You put the right ingredients in the right order, and you get life. It's that simple. Why, we can synthesize simple living cells from scratch in laboratories; synthesizing a fertilized human egg is different only in degree of difficulty, not kind. It is perfectly doable in principle.
        A: But do you suppose it would be more or less difficult to turn a human skin cell into a fertilized egg than to synthesize one from scratch?
        C: Less, I should think. The skin cell will have pre-constructed many of the necessary constituents. I believe I have read about skin cells which were made to become stem cells, and I understand stem cells can be made into any kind of cell.
        A: Which finally brings me to my point: isn't it true that any cell in the body has the 'potential' to become a human? Even the lowly skin cell, shed after just 2 weeks, can aspire to personhood if placed in the right broth of chemicals.
        C: To convert a skin cell to a zygote and grow it - that's some broth.
        A: And do your fetuses not need a finely calculated broth as well? Remember that most fetuses never become babies, after all. But to continue: you only mentioned possibility. Your possibility grants personhood to every cell of the body. I don't think Whitman meant 'I contain multitudes' quite that way!
        C: That's a really contrived example. 'Possibility' in ordinary language doesn't include astronomically small odds. If even 1 cell were to be raised in the extraordinary manner you propose, that would be just 1 cell out of literally quadrillions of human cells to have existed.
        A: I have another objection, then. No doubt you've prepared a slippery slope argument for me: if humanity does not begin at a sharply defined moment such as conception or implantation, then where? At birth? The 2nd trimester? The 3rd? etc etc.
        C: I was merely waiting for an opportune moment.
        A: But I think the slope applies to any idea like yours of humanity as a binary proposition (and not, say, a continuum).
        C: How so? My position seems quite safe: humanity begins at fertilization, the moment of conception. Unless you mean to say the exact femtosecond the DNA atoms unite is important?
        A: No. But have you ever heard of parthenogenesis?
        C: Yes.
        A: In parthenogenesis, there is no conception or fertilization. An egg just starts dividing for no particular reason. Perhaps it will divide once, perhaps twice. Perhaps the 2 new cells will never do anything more. And so it winds its uncertain way to something we recognize as an embryo. Now, suppose this happens in a human woman, as seems possible? Where does the humanity of the resultant fetus start? The instant an egg divided? But that would seem to imply all the eggs which divide are humans who are then instantly aborted. When the division starts? Or finishes? Or the second division? But why not then the third or fourth or fifth?
        C: I could not say. But because I am ignorant of something is not a proof of its nonexistence. Consider the ship of the Argonauts. As it sails from port to port, first the sails are replaced, then the riggings; in another, they reap a bargain on navigational gear; in another, they are given a spare rudder; in a fifth place, a storm forces them ashore to replace the planks of the hull, and a bad run-in with a reef necessitates replacement of the keel itself. On their return to Athens, Theseus asks his insurer to lower the premium since it is now a new ship though it bears the name of the old. Would you have the insurer charge Theseus old rates for new ships since Theseus can't tell the insurer the exact repair or second the ship ceased to be old and became new?
        A: No, but your example doesn't help your case. The insurer should set a new rate because the ship now performs like new. It has fresher less-worn parts, all the latest improvements and gear, and so on. It is simply less likely to sink, and that's all that matters to the insurer. If it acts like a new ship, then oughtn't we to pragmatically treat it like a new ship? To finish the analogy, I see people as being like the ship, and insuring the ship at a lower rate is like classifying as human. If they can act all the acts, think all the thoughts, and feel all the feelings people can, then I will treat them the same.
        C: Then you would insure even a computer!
        [Apologist shrugs.]
        A: If it quacks like a duck...
        C: I see there is no convincing you. I am sorry for't. I shall continue believing that there is some essence about being human, and you shall continue in your psychological stance that human is as human does. Good day.
        [Contrarian sighs and leaves dejectedly.]