One of the really attractive aspects of such faces is how much data you can pack in, and how clear the mapping between the statistics and any one feature is.

Consider a regular Chernoff face. It has eyebrows, a nose, a mouth, and the head's shape. Let's just take the eyebrows. How many parameters does an eyebrow reasonably have which could convey information?

Well, there's the:
1) length of the eyebrow. Is it short (-) or long (---) or something in between? (--)
2) The angle of the eyebrow. This conveys emotion; a flat, 180 degree eyebrow conveys annoyance or nonplussity, perhaps, whereas 45 degrees expresses interest or shock, and 135 degrees skepticism.
3) The curve of the eyebrow. Is it a straight line, or is it convex, or concave? This too we notice, even if the curvature isn't as significant as angle.
4) The location of the eyebrow; how far is it from the middle of the face? Are the eyebrows squashed together in a unibrow, or is there a yawning canyon betwixt?
5) ... We could go on, depending on the richness of our graphics. What color is the hair? How thick is the eyebrow? What shape does it have? (If we have a quadrilateral for an eyebrow instead of just a line, even more parameters become available).

So we can pack in at least 4 parameters into the eyebrows alone. Some of these features have an almost idiot-proof definition. We can get 3 parameters into the shape of the head quite easily. In Cartesian graphing, a circle is, of course, x^2 + y^2 = n. n gets us 1 parameter. If we move to ellipses, or f*x^2 + g*y^2 = n, we now can plug in our statistical data to f, g, and n - and now we have 3 parameters, just with ellipses.

And it's not hard to add still more variation. Faces have vertical symmetry: the left is a copy of the right. In essence we're wasting half our space on redundant data. Why not make use of it? With parameters a-m, create a Chernoff face and take the left side. With parameters n-z, create a second Chernoff face and take the right side. Paste left and right into a new face with twice the information of either.

Or what about the relationships of the features? We could add a 4th parameter to the overall shape: location within the ellipse. Perhaps the nose/mouth/eyebrows/eyes could be treated as a single item and moved around inside the head. There's 2 dimensions to move it in, so that's another 2 parameters...

So far, our asymmetrical Chernoff face can support up to 24 data points. (4 features, 4 parameters for eyebrows, 1 for each of the others, 3+4, the 3 parameters of the head shape, 7+3, 2 parameters for location in head shape, 12, double that for the 2 sides of the head...)

If anything, our problem with Chernoff faces is a surfeit of possibilities for every aspect.