The anime/manga _Death Note_ is interesting on many levels. The shinigami can be traced back to the West; the cosmology is remarkably atheistic; the genre itself is almost unclassifiable - is it detective/mystery, drama, suspense, action, Greek tragedy, supernatural, or what? The plot warrants considerable analysis, and furnishes considerable scope for thought - just coming up with ingenious ways of exploiting a Death Note consistent with the rules is good intellectual fun, or one can devise interesting theories to analysis (example: could one use information theory to devise optimal strategies for a Kira and a L?).

Me? I'm interested in the ending.

---

I should note that it's unusual for anime and manga to have even good endings, much less great ones. Endings are challenging in any medium, but the business of anime and manga seems to positively militate against them.

Consider the lowly mangaka. Her creation's continuance is fraught with uncertainty; adrift on the vicissitudes of the very active commercial world of weekly and monthly periodicals (the majority of possible employers), there is not the slightest guarantee her manga will continue to be published next year or month or perhaps even week. What incentive does she have to invest in intricate arcs with subtle connections and callbacks? There aren't many good analogies here; one could try to compare to a novelist, except an inspired novelist can produce a tremendous amount in a short time (a novelist could theoretically write a good-sized novel in roughly a day at 60 WPM) - but of course even an inspired mangaka will have trouble quickly writing & drawing & inking & coloring hundreds of pages. But on the other hand, comparison to making movies is not apt either as even extremely cheap feature-length movies cost dozens of thousands of dollars while drawing manga is so cheap that thousands of amateurs routinely do it and give their work away for free.

The best analogy I think would be to reach back in time to when novels were serialized in much the same kind of Western monthly and weekly periodicals as are still prevalent in Japan. This provides some useful parallels, and immediately draws our attention to one problem of the periodical model: it in essence pays by the word (or should that be frame?). One gets what one pays for; if the artist or author is being paid for volume, they are not for quality. I defy any modern reader to read through the imposing bulk of Charles Dickens's _The Pickwick Papers_ and its 57 chapters and hundreds of papers, & not think even once that perhaps it would be a more satisfactory novel if it were just a tad more concise and less discursive. Even humorous strips like _Garfield_ palpably outwear their welcome somewhere around volume 35, or perhaps 46; how much more so for plot-driven ones! Well, it's clear that a similar incentive is at work with manga. The author has every incentive to pad things out, to draw the series out until long after it should have been wrapped up and ended. Will even the most ardent fan of, not Dickens, but Rumiko Takahashi, truly contest that _Ranma ½_ and _InuYasha_ have not suffered greatly for their overly extended length? She may have become the best-selling female comic artist, and one of the wealthiest women in Japan, based on their popularity - but the critical fan must look sadly on the bloated carcasses of what were quite good or decent (respectively) series.

Still worse is the fact that most anime are adaptations, and most adaptations are inaugurated at a manga's chief period of popularity. So, almost by definition, most animators will have no access to the author's ending by virtue of its nonexistence. There are several ways an animator can cope with this lack.

1) Stall

The animation studio can simply stretch out production and release over several seasons. The studio simply animates as far as the manga goes, and stops. In the interval before the studio gears up for the next season, the author will have produced more manga which can immediately be processed into anime episodes. This approach has the merit that what is produced has the chance to be a quality product, since there are no more constraints than are naturally present to the medium and funding. The downside to this solution is that there is no guarantee that there will ever be a sequel season; the viewer can easily be left with an incomplete work. This happens often.

2) Stretch

However, usually the author will not write 24 episodes' worth of material in just one season. Here the studio can stretch the episodes (lengthy previews and summaries, 'filler' content, and other such stupidity), or make up pointless plots & stories which change nothing (since if any characters permanently died, say, it might contradict the resumed plot). This approach gives us artistically abominable anime as _Dragon Ball Z_ or _Naruto_. If a series is commercially successful enough to justify this treatment, such a series is nigh guaranteed to be animated to completion. But what profiteth an anime to be finished if it lose its soul?

3) Sustain

A studio could, of course, just use its in-house writers to come up with new plot arcs on its own, and venture off into new territory. If the author can't be bothered to hurry up, we'll write our own! (With blackjacks and hookers...) This differs from #2 inasmuch as the new writers aren't required to be consistent with any future manga chapters; that is, a #2 episode might have all the characters spend a fun day at the beach and everyone comes home exactly the same and the beach is never again mentioned by anyone, but a #3 episode might see the protagonist's best friend sacrifice herself to stop the evil plan and set the stage for the final showdown in episodes 23 and 24 which ends the series. Sometimes the distinction between old and original material is clear (watching through _Hellsing_ TV, one can almost feel the transition) & sometimes unclear (_Trigun_; I'm still unclear on whether Yasuhiro Nightow told the animators what the manga ending would be, or what the exact relationship between the 2 endings is). Regardless, #3 is not a final solution. The writers may spin new arcs as long as they have airtime left, but sooner or later they will run out of time, and will need to do either approach 1, 2, or -

4) Stop

The fourth and final major solution is to come up with a real ending. This approach can be understood as working in 2 ways:

4.1) Story arc

Most plot-driven works have multiple story arcs which ultimately build up into the final ending arc. In the Stop: Story Arc approach, you merely take whatever story arc's end is closest to your scheduled end, and make that the ending. Hopefully you will have been working up to this the entire preceding end so that the end feels appropriately significant. A good example here is _The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya_. Haruhi and Kyon's first kiss and getting together feels like a satisfying ending; they can ride off into the sunset together. Hardly anything more needs to be said but of course, viewers won't feel betrayed if a second season happens - we may have seen everything important, but we will still enjoy the further wacky adventures of the SOS Brigade.

4.2) Start a new ending

But sometimes there is no reasonable story arc to end with; sometimes there is only one story arc period. Take _Hellsing_, for example. Aside from a few one-off episodes which build the world and represent the early foreshadowings, there is only one large story arc with no end in sight. So what does one do? One comes up with an entirely original ending. In Hellsing's case, we now know that the fake vampires the protagonists battle were dispatched by old vampire Nazis as a prelude to invading England; but the animators had no inkling of this back in 2000 or 2001 when planning began. So they had to come up with their own ending; a mediocre one. There is no doubt that the OVA adaptation, which was able to Stall until the manga finished, is superior in every way to the old TV adaptation.

Thus we can see that both the Death Note manga & anime are unusual in several ways:
* Both were finished.
* Tsugumi Ohba planned it out from the start. (There is little in the 100-odd chapters which could be removed with no violence to plot or world-creation or characterization; the urge to profit would seem to've been satisfied by all the spin-offs and adaptations, leaving the original unslubbered.)
* The animators opted for #1, quite reasonably animating the L arc as season 1 and waiting to animate the Mello-Near arc as season 2.
* Finances were not a problem. Some endings are so memorable precisely because of financing problems (original _Neon Genesis Evangelion_), but they are more in the way of a train wreck or NASCAR crash. An ending like Death Note would have been ill-served by haste or frugality. Fortunately, it was one of the most anticipated or popular anime of 2006 & 2007 (respectively).

Thus, all conditions were cleared.

---

Now, before we understand the ending, one needs to know - what is Death Note?

The plot is the important thing. The brilliantly ambitious & altruistic Light Yagami possesses a small black notebook called a 'Death Note', which allows him to supernaturally kill anyone he wishes by writing down their birth name.

---

Here is another interesting topic of discussion. The Death Note seems to require birth names or at least the first name a person is called - but not the full name. If we think about it, any other kind of name would cause problems. One cannot simply use the person's 'current' name, since that would be ambiguous (besides disadvantaging the detective hunting a Kira even further), and someone's current name is an unclear concept. What is the name of a person you meet on a street? You can get his attention by calling him 'Blondy' or yelling 'Hey, plaid-shirt guy!', & no one would think it odd if you continued to use that as his name. But we think intuitively that surely that's not really his name - but what is a name but use?

---

Naturally, he begins to use the Note and starts by systematically killing off criminals listed in public records. Arrogantly (or hubristically?) he makes no attempt to conceal his murders, and eventually police all over the world begin to notice that an astounding number of criminals are dying of heart attacks. They dispatch their best detective, L, to hunt Light down and bring him to justice. (L is not his real name, but L, N, & M all adopt pseudonyms to foil the Death Note.)

By clever ploys, L manages to narrow down Light's location to his town, and begins hunting there in person. Light turns the Japanese police against L, but at the cost of narrowing down the pool of suspects so drastically that L puts Light at the top of the suspect list.

The 2 join forces, and eventually Light manages to get L to accept a false premise about the Death Note, engineers a situation where the false premise exculpates Light, and then, out of suspicion, kills L. If that were all there was, Death Note would be memorable enough as a kind of parody of _Crime and Punishment_ where Raskolnikov really *is* an _ubermensch_. But in killing L, Light has made mistakes - if one does not accept the false premise, it is clear that Light was the killer all along. Crucially, L could have tested the premise and discovered its truth, but L had a self-imposed moral code which forbade 'winning' in any dishonest way. We are led to believe that L could have saved himself & won if he had been willing to compromise his personal code.

Regardless, L's 2 successors, young boys named Near and Mello compete to take up L's mantle by solving the case and avenging their role model. Both seek a Death Note of their own, and many complications ensue.

The second arc ends with a confrontation. Light and Near (Mello having already been killed by an acolyte of Light's) agree to meet in an abandoned warehouse to discuss the case. Both plan to make this first meeting the last: Light plans to kill Near, Near's remaining assistants, and his fellow police (who know too much about him); while Near plans to definitively unmask Light, who as a mass murder will then be secretly tried and executed. As Light has come to no longer possess his Death Note, his plan is to wait for everyone to remove their masks and then another acolyte of his (who possess a supernatural power which infallibly reveals a person's name when he sees their face) will write down everyone but Light's name in a Death Note.

But the plan goes horribly awry. Light, made certain that his follower has written down the names and doomed the others, begins boasting of his accomplishments and crowing over their defeat. But they fail to die! His follower had been fooled - the Death Note was a fake (courtesy of Near). Damned out of his own mouth, Light makes a final attempt to kill Near, but is shot by a former lackey & then killed by his shinigami (as was promised at the very beginning). Finis.

---

Now, the epilogue raises some questions. The manner of Mello's death told Near that there was another Death Note, and that explains satisfactorily how Near could have known to substitute the fake. But, as the detective observes, the follower was known as being a very meticulous, thorough, careful man - some of the reasons Light had chosen him. The stakes were as high as possible, and it was the work of moments to test his Death Note on a random live television broadcaster, for example. So why didn't he? Was he truly just careless on that day?

It is suggested that Near used his captured Death Note to control the follower's actions that day, expressly commanding him to fail in his mission and then commit suicide.

Given this, who won? That is my fundamental question. At the end of _Death Note_, who has triumphed? It is easy to say that Light, Mello, and L are all dead so the victor must be Near. But it as simple as that?

Did L win? He may have been killed by Light, but he never compromised his personal code, his method forced Light to weaken his position enough that he could be definitively caught, and he did know that Light was guilty. And Light *was* brought to justice in the end. So arguably L won.

Did Mello win? Probably not, but on the other hand, Near's victory would have been impossible without Mello. Mello saw a possibility that Near admits he didn't, he tested it, and thereby proved to Near he had made what would've been a fatal mistake. If you remember that Mello's goal was to prove himself superior to Near and a more worthy successor to L - then you could well consider him a victor.

Did Near win? Well, surely he did. After all, he out-thought Light, encompassed his confession and destruction and most importantly survived to the end. Doesn't all that make him a victor? Well, look at the case for Mello. Near would have failed, and it is ambiguous whether or not he used a Death Note on the follower. If he did, then he failed doubly - once in pure detection skill, and twice in living up to L's example. Can we count him as a victor?

Did Light win? He carried out his mission for years. And we are led to believe that by his actions, crime dropped considerably (presumably saving countless lives worldwide). After his passing, crime would rise again. It is one of the questions in the background of the entire series: his means are arguably immoral, but the end is moral; his opponents use moral means, but perhaps to immoral effect - the epilogue mutely comments on this dilemma, as grieving citizens memorialize Light and his quondam opponents travel to a large drug bust. Further, it took the efforts of 3 world-class detectives to finally bring him down, 2 die in the process, and they never manage to try or convict him - to say nothing of the suggestion that they couldn't even manage that without resorting to Death Notes themselves (and by implication lowering themselves to his level). If Goliath triumphs at the cost of several limbs, few would count that a victory. When we consider his mistakes were motivated by a fatal flaw of hubris, perhaps we should say Light defeated himself and the other 3 were incidental.

You can see that depending on your criteria, the losers and victors swirl and mingle like tea leaves. Who won, who lost? Answer this and you have a skeleton key to _Death Note_.