In the 2nd/3/4 (??) episode of _Full Metal Panic! The Second Raid_, there is a curious introductory scene. The setting is the student council's clubroom; the protagonist Kaname Chidori, female lead. The small television is the invariable object of her attention; it is tuned to a peculiar Tokugawa-era samurai drama, which plays out as follows.

A thuggish yakuza and his subordinates have kidnapped a young woman, and he holding is her hostage at knife-point. Into the middle of the house's enclosed courtyard enters - Spider-Man, or rather, we shall call this kimono- and mask-clad person 'Spider-san'. It is, of course, a trap. Spider-san employs his oddly fluid webs to disarm the boss of his knife, and agilely ascending to the rooftop, he begins shooting his webs onto the faces of the goons (show in close-ups).

At this point, a emergency news-broadcast interprets the drama of Spider-san, annoying Chidori (who complains that the drama had just begun to reach its climax). The broadcast concerns some terrorism in progress, which is the cue for the male lead (Sousuke Sagara) to depart for another episode of derring-do.

What particularly struck me about this scene is how out of place it is, how complex in comparison to the surrounding show. _Full Metal Panic!_ is, to put it simply, just entertainment. It doesn't aspire to particularly interesting mecha combat, nor does it have an interesting take on modern warfare & terrorism; its novelties, such as they are, are largely confined to mixing the mecha and high school romance genres (as a viewing of _Fumoffu_ will quickly convince one), and the humor is straightforward. The character designs are fine, but they cannot be considered immortal like those of _Evangelion_, and the production quality is high but not notable.

But here we have a scene which could easily be interpreted in at least 3 different ways!

The first way is the straightforward literal way. Chidori is watching a show, as usual, and Sagara has to go off and fight. It provides a reasonable starting point for that episode's plot. This is the clearest reading, and the one everyone can see.

The second way is on a higher level of the plot, a thematic one. The normal viewer would have watched the first season of _Full Metal Panic!_, and then watched the mini-series _Full Metal Panic! Fumoffu_, which focused exclusively on the school and romance aspects. By starting with a clubroom scene and segueing into an anti-terrorism mission, the viewer is reminded that the subject-material is going to cover both school and war. It's a pleasant way to start the episode, as it reintroduces us to both characters and reminds us that one of the aspects of Chidori's character is a fondness for samurai dramas. Possibly we are also meant to be reminded that the other female student council member is the daughter of a local yakuza family.

The third way is as a rather complex parody.

There are not 1, or 2, but at least 3 different parodies going on here. The first parody is that the drama is actually depicting bukkake: Spider-san's webs are thick, liquid, and stereotypically white. The goons react in deep disgust (as any heterosexual man would if forced to be ejaculated upon by another man). The camera shots make a point of being close-ups of the faces, when the previous shots were distance and middle shots. All these points are in exact correspondence with the stereotypical bukkake scene. The clincher is Chidori's use of 'climax'. This could not have been a coincidence - climax is not the first word that comes to mind if you are complaining about the ending being cut off, but it has strong sexual connotations.

The second parody centers on the premise being fundamentally absurd, but consistent with the Japanese media industries. One doesn't have to look hard to find real examples, like 'Zatoichi Meets Yojimbo' or 'Mothra vs. Godzilla'. It makes just as much sense to have Spider-Man in the Tokugawa era for his adventures. We can derive further amusement from noting that the samurai genre is so cliched that Spider-Man seems to work just fine; why should a man with the proportional strength and agility of a spider have any more difficulty going through the set motions than, say, a blind masseur who is a master of the sword? (Or a schizophrenic pacifist with a blunt blade, or a quasi-immortal mass murderer, or...) One of the functions of parody is to play with conventions and make us aware of repetitions and boundaries and what it means to be a genre piece. A Spider-san is certainly effective at that.

The third parody is of the viewers. Not you and me, I mean, but rather Chidori and Sagara. Both seem to be attentive, interested, and pleased viewers. It is implied Spider-san is a regular series, and that both are regular viewers, perhaps even devoted. But neither evinces the slightest bit of irony or amusement. I believe it impossible for any real human to watch this scene without mentally smirking a little, even if said human managed to miss the bukkake. "The virus of irony is as widespread in California as herpes, and once you're infected with it, it lives in your brain forever." (_Cryptonomicon_) So it is a double commentary: Sagara is so culturally impoverished that he cannot respond in a sophisticated manner (a feature of his character that is played for laughs dozens of times throughout the series) and Chidori just likes it, as she likes baseball perhaps.

The fourth way we can understand this scene is admittedly a little speculative on my part, but it serves as a interesting thought, perhaps. We could see the scene as commentary on modern Japanese society. A society gets the media it deserves. What is being said about it when it asks for such syncretic absurdities as Spider-san? Where's the originality here? When we Westerners watch a Japanized American character fight inside a drama, all inside a school-romance genre (pioneered by American shows) anime (a medium which owes many things, from its shinigami characters to its Disney-inspired eyes, to America & the West)... well, I get a somewhat queasy feeling I cannot explain.