I-CON 29 / 2010

I-CON is an LI convention held at Stony Brook University, which caters to all things geek: TV shows, SF books, anime & manga, video & board games, cosplay, LARPing, etc. It doesn't do any of them especially well, but it does a lot. It's run by the Sci Fi Forum of SBU, an ancient little club of a few diehards and people like me who drift in and out; the SFF's other major point of interest is its club library: an enormous collection of books that runs into the tens of thousands.

I-CON is a 3-day weekend affair during Spring Break, before Easter.

As a penurious student, the $39 pass was a little daunting and I elected to become a volunteer: one pays a $20 bond, gets a badge/ticket, works 8 hours, and gets one's Andrew Jackson back. Any spare time at I-CON is one's profit. (If one welshes, the bond is forfeit and one's name goes on a blacklist. The blacklist was much mooted, but I never saw it in evidence.)

An email inquiry brought a rote response & PDF. I printed it out and mailed it on Monday, but by Thursday evening there was no response. So I just showed up in the big SBU gymnasium at 5PM.

A group of volunteers & staffers had gathered (perhaps 20 or so at any one time). Our job was to assemble roughly 227 tables (each with 2 chairs) into 9 rectangles, each positioned down to a few inches. To do this, we had a single 3'x3' posterboard with AutoCAD schematic, some tape measures, and a box of gloves. The tables were all rather heavy. 2 of them would be easily 30 pounds. We would take them in pairs, or if we were daring, a table per person.

It's a little odd that people can spend hours moving and positioning tables, and yet insist on holding them horizontally, parallel to the ground - one of the most awkward ways to move a heavy table - and not realize that they are easier to carry vertically (one hand on top to steer and one below to hold), and more maneuverable to boot. It is a good example of how people can lack mindfulness about what they are doing.

(I also noticed that my grip exerciser paid off here: I found it much easier to handle tables than in the past, because I could grip and hold almost any angle or place on the tables. Grip exercisers: not just for fighting RSI & boredom!)

It took hours. On Saturday, I would wander through the gymnasium, looking at all the dealers, and notice how most of them had shifted around and moved tables. If volunteering hadn't been time-based but results-based, I think I would have choked on my own bile.

The volunteers and I-CON staffers there were not, as I had expected, uniformly male and unattractive. I was quite surprised at how many women were there (perhaps a third); not a few were lookers.

The camaraderie made the time fly by and it wasn't long before several squares were set up. Then we had to shift them a foot. And again, we set up more tables. And shifted them. The staffers would huddle around the schematic and after much measuring and finger-pointing, have us undo the previous shift. I focused on loading dollies with tables - much less frustrating!

At about 7:30 PM, Bill (a big burly old guy in his 40s, last name, I think, Nussbaum) called us together and announced what we all suspected: the table of heroes (chicken, chicken, ham, and vegetarian), cookies (chocolate chip), and soda (canned, with cups & ice) was for us and that it was a venerable I-CON tradition to feed its setup volunteers. We chowed down. It was then that the ping pong club came in and started playing. None of them seemed very good; I never saw them make more than 4 practice volleys.

Back to table positioning. This time they decided to move 6 islands (what they called the squares). Maddening! I kept thinking, half a meter doesn't matter! I was relieved when we finished - I had been hanging out at the control table and listening to the gossip - and could begin putting up the curtains. That was more interesting: 2 islands were not just tables & chairs, but had curtains marking them off. (On Saturday, I noticed that most of the curtain sections didn't have anything special, but a few dealers put them to good use with their clothing stock.)

You had to slide the curtains on first, and then connect the beams together, and only then could everyone grab a beam and hoist the whole assemblage up as if it were an Amish barn-raising.  That done, we had to move all the excess tables & chairs and pack them into the leftover corner. (I wound up moving at least 100 chairs - I counted.)  By this point, it was 10 PM. I signed out, with 5 out of my 8 hours finished. (Little did I know how difficult it would be to do the remaining 3 and get my money back.)

I slept well.

On Friday, after much confusion about how Dani & Molly were getting to I-CON and back (first they were going with me, then not, then I was taking them home at midnight), I set off and arrived at 5 PM, a solid hour before any events began. I found the gym busy as a bee hive, and was quickly told that the volunteer table had moved to the SAC - the big student building in the middle of the campus. The line out the door surprised me: the schedule didn't list any particularly awesome events starting at 6, so why were >100 people queued? I of course bypassed that line; it was for the little people who had to pay for their tickets. This turned out to be a disaster: the volunteer table had to be reorganized twice, and where I had been at the very head of the line, I got shunted to the very end. I didn't get my badge until 6:20, and I was told there were no volunteer hours available that night and to try back in the morning. Oh well.

Badge in hand, off to the third floor of the SAC! The meeting rooms had all been appropriated for various panels and discussion groups.

I first went to 'Something about Steampunk', hosted by some authors of the same; a few women had nice steampunk costumes. (One of the smartest things geeky fandoms ever do is figure out how to reel the women in with clothes or costumes of some sort.) The discussion wasn't particularly enlightening, and when I got minimal response to my point that steampunk like _Girl Genius_ was thinly disguised fantasy/magic, I moved on.

What I wanted next was what I assumed was the H.P. Lovecraft discussion - "Even Death Will Die" - but I found it had been canceled for lack of participation. The next, 'Hitler in Spaaace!' - likewise.

From lack of alternative, I wandered into a room labeled _Flashforward_ reading. The delay at the volunteer table meant that I wandered in just as the animated author (Robert J. Sawyer) wound to a close. After some discussion, I suddenly realized that he had been reading from his script from a TV show called _Flashforward_ adapted from a novel he had written, and that I had watched 2 or 3 episodes of it. I was quite surprised. Conventions are supposed to be for this sort of meeting, but I hadn't expected to find anyone of personal interest other than Tiffany Grant or Samuel Delaney.

The scene was a deleted scene, so he was not giving major spoilers. But his Q&A was interesting. He mentioned that a number of scenes had been deleted (and explained that TV DVD collections rarely came with deleted scenes because TV shows are on a tight budget and never film scenes which may be deleted), and described a nice one of a character identifying a victim on the ground of a football field, the blase governmental functionary guiding her, and the slow pullout which reveals the entire field covered in rows of victims and other pairs identifying bodies.

I also found interesting his description of how the timeframe of the eponymous prescience had been changed from 20 years to just 6 months; the many expensive actors would require too much makeup and their beauty would be under-utilized for scenes set 20 years in the future, and the exact 6 months figure comes from the author's suggestion that the series progress in 'real-time' - the interval between each episode being that of the interval between each broadcast. This change came at some cost to the plot (one character gets pregnant and raises a baby in 20 years without issue, but in 6 months?), and ultimately failed anyway because the show get put on hiatus.

He also bemoaned how the network punched up the violence, toned down the philosophy and musings, and how it was the most expensive show Disney was producing at the time. (All those actors and locations, apparently.) Likewise, he described how writing was done: collectively, and the credits listing author are allocated by contract and impressionistically - one's contract specifies 1 credit, and the head writer one week will say that this episode feels more like your work than someone else, and so you get the credit this week. Rather a strange system, but very Hollywood. (I believe his writing credit was for the script he was reading to us, episode 19, due in several weeks.)

He related with amusement how the network wished to highlight the original book _Flashforward_ as little as possible, because obviously the book spoils the mystery driving the first several episodes - what causes the flashforward. He was coy about what a second season might focus on, saying only that they had ideas. My guess is a repeat of the original (physics experiment gone wrong).

Leaving, I found the 'rabid fanboys' discussion in the Psychology building about to start. It was some old convention hands discussing bad experiences. (One panelist was an impressive Kamina of _Tengen Toppen Gurren Lagann_; the impressive part was not the blue bodypaint, though it was perfectly executed, but that he had the physique to put it off: washboard abs, well-defined pecs, cut skin etc.)

Fangirls, apparently, are very prone to 'glomping' people - hugging violently, from behind, unexpectedly, and the Kamina had particularly suffered their depredations. (The Kamina guy was the first of two people at I-CON that I would've sworn I knew from the RIT anime club, but didn't.)

Just as I began to weary, who should walk in but my old Internet acquaintance Vi Veri Veniversum Vivus Vici! (V for short). He was dressed as ever as the character V from _V_. I knew for certain that this was not a random cosplayer because the panelists asked each their favorite anime, and V said Evangelion. His verbal style and absolutist responses were quite consistent with his online persona. ("As above, so below.")

We had both come expecting Tiffany Grant, the English voice actor of the Evangelion character Asuka Soryu Langley, and who has had contact with many Eva principals. But alas, she wasn't that that panel. V had a nice list of Grant's schedule & questions to ask her (among other things; I was quite impressed by his preparation), which I should've asked to copy but I didn't. So I left, after chatting with one of the convention staffers hanging out; it turned out that she knew V from when he was an SBU student with the anime/video game club (V is currently a history grad student somewhere after graduating in 2008).

So from 8 to 9 PM, I wandered across the campus to the earth sciences building where a 'Popular Media Licenses & Gaming' panel was running. It was reasonably well attended. The two authors didn't give much information, but they were certainly enthusiastic and enjoyed their work. As a former Star Wars nerd and fan of its Expanded Universe (which is based largely on novelizations farmed out to exactly these authors), I was a little shocked at the lack of coordination or guidance authors received; the guy told us that one time, he had finished a novel almost entirely and was getting ready to hand it in, when he was told that a main character of his - crucial to the entire plot - was getting killed off in another work and could he please fix his book? Amazing.

I headed back over to the psychology building, and just across from the previous panel, Tiffany Grant was shooting the breeze and taking questions about ADR.

ADR directing, I gathered, has principally to do with taking the translated script and tweaking so it actually makes sense in English and matches the mouth-flaps. And yelling at the VAs to do better or something. The script challenges were her principal topic; how does one handle the Japanese honorifics like _san_ or _kun_? They're frequent, and so important that an unwashed sub watcher like me picks up on them and understands when they're being used as insults or jokes or characterization, but how does that carry over to the dub?

She mentioned one anime - _Sister Princess_, I think - in which each of something like a dozen female characters regarded the protagonist as their brother, and each had a different pronoun/nickname for him! They wound up coming with a boatload of variations on 'brother': 'bro', 'honored brother', etc.

Other times, the problem was the dub needing more material. When dubbing _Excel Saga_, the American VA for Excel turned out to speak faster than the Japanese VA did; the Japanese VA was unable to say all the things she was scripted to, and so the dub wound up being 'truer' than the original! But that's unusual, since the character Excel is hyperactive to the max.

V was there before I was, and kept trying to steer the subject to Eva. She hadn't yet seen the new movie, _Rebuild 2.0_, and so couldn't comment; but she did have an interesting anecdote for us. She had been in Japan for some reason or other, and was in the Hello Kitty! theme park there (Grant is nuts for Hello Kitty! and was wearing appropriate HK merchandise) with Yuki Miyamura. Grant, remember, was the English VA of Asuka; Miyamura is the original Japanese VA. In a way, they both made their name with Asuka.

V also asked about the recent corporate travails of Grant's longtime employer ADV, an old American anime company which recently got partially bought and even more recently despised its buyer and dissolved in a complex legal kabuki that lead to its assets being sold to a group of shell corporations. Or something. Apparently they're still working, however they work.

So. It was an interesting session. I wound up seeing Grant only once after that, but V got to interview her and put up the video on his 'ReVolution of Eva' fansite; I really ought to watch that.

When I left ADR scripting, I didn't really know what to do. An art show was supposed to be starting in the Javits lecture center (7 or 8 big auditoriums stuck together), but when I got there, they were comically unready. They didn't open up until 2 or 3 hours after they were scheduled to! (There was some nice art, but nothing especially interesting to me.)

So I wandered across the hall to an auditorium playing a movie called _Moon_. I had vaguely heard of it when it was released in 2009, but I didn't know anything about the plot.

It turned out to be pretty interesting: a man assigned to oversee mining on the Moon, who discovers he is the latest is a series of clones created and killed by the ruthless corporate overseers, and how he foils their plans and escapes to Earth. The premise is more than a little silly: there's no need for humans to be on the Moon, since the round-trip lag is less than 5 seconds or so. And if robotics or AI were so advanced that the clones' HAL-like overseer could feel sympathy for them and seek to aid the clones, there would doubly be no need for clones. It was a fairly short movie though - I think it ran from 10 to 11:30.

At that point, the art show *finally* opened somewhat. After browsing through, I came out and ran into none other than my SBU acquaintance Serge. We decided to go check out the ball room in the SAC devoted to board & card games, and wound up checking out a card game called _Illuminatus!_. Along with a strange short old red-headed woman who joined our group, we attempted to puzzle out the rules about joining conspiracy cards and attacking other groups. We didn't play it right and didn't get very far in the game, but we enjoyed ourselves until about 1:30 AM when we were kicked out. Serge and his friend may or may not've gone off to a Denny's; I begged off, since I wanted to get in early the next day (that day, to be precise!), and I was feeling kind of sleepy anyway.

Saturday

Needless to say, I wound up oversleeping. I wasn't terribly impressed by the early events, but after a kerfluffle as to how Molly & her ex-boyfriend Matt & Danni were getting home - we agreed to rendezvous at a concert at midnight - I got there for the tail end (~1 PM) of a big panel in the Javits center, about 'Voice Acting, Then and Now', which was the last time I saw Tiffany Grant.

The panel was 6 or 7 former/current voice actors and other anime industry ronin like that. I didn't hear much, but they did say that things were hard now but not quite as hard as it was a few months ago when the industry was imploding and doing nothing, and that as ever the key to VA work was acting classes and lots of networking. At that point, a pudgy young woman stood up and delivered her story: back at ICON 2007 she had asked pretty much that question and gotten that answer; taking it to heart, she took acting lessons and began working, and was at this moment a successful English voice actor in South Korea doing English language lesson material. She got a round of applause. (She didn't say whether she came all the way from South Korea to attend ICON; I kind of hope not.) I thought that was interesting - it had never occurred to me before that English might be so valued in South Korea.

~1 pm voice acting then and now t. grant etc.
remember the girl who went to a panel in '07 on vaing and now works in south Korea voicing
see also how remunerative it is to work in south Korea as an English teacher: http://www.travelblog.org/Asia/South-Korea/Seoul/blog-118713.html
2 writing unique heroes and memorable villains
~2-3 went to queer politics in SF. Samuel Delaney etc
~3 bankrupt the enemy: medieval feasts
~4 so you wanna write horror (Miskatonic river press)
4 superhero: American god?
4:30 the polymath, or, the life and opinions of Samuel R. Delaney movie
5 autonomous warfare
6-8 colder side of global warming
8-10 cosplay contest
10-12 irresponsible captain Tylor
12-1 Voltaire contest

Sunday
12 worked
---
The bidding drove it to >40$! http://www.catdrinkingsongs.com/

"Includes FOUR CDs: Whiskers in the Jar, Irish Drinking Songs for Cat
Lovers, Live at the Cactus Cafe, and Irish Drinking Songs: The Cat
Lover's Companion, plus one bonus CD of traditional Celtic Music. "

You can hear some at http://www.catdrinkingsongs.com/cat_nip.shtml