An open letter to the library

Every time I enter the stacks, I have to pass that long row of shelves full of used old books which you keep trying to sell. Yet, every few weeks I look at them - hoping for some new ones - and I can't help but notice that they're the same damn books every time. Only once in a blue moon do I ever see someone actually buying any of them, and they certainly aren't making much of a dent in the wall.

Come on, guys: isn't it time to admit that this way of selling them just isn't working? You need a new approach. Fortunately, I have a very modest proposal to turn things around.

Here's the idea: every week, take one shelf and set it forth on a table. Post a sign with an ultimatum, saying something like 'This week only! Must go!' For good measure, cut the prices of those books in half. (Half of something is better than all of nothing.)

Unfortunately, even half-off, many of the books won't sell. Perhaps even most of them. But we can turn things around by following the last step of the plan: when the week elapses, take all the books which didn't sell and burn them. Place the next shelf on the table, and repeat.

Yes, yes, I said 'burn them'. It is a suitably resonant fate for books no one wants. (Being thrown away or pulped for newsprint aren't all that superior fates.) And there is no better way to get what we need - the guilt-factor! We need each person who passes by those books on Friday afternoon to think: 'I will never ever see those books again, because each book I don't buy will be destroyed.' Also: 'Ooh, sale!'

This proposal has any number of benefits. It permanently reduces the backlog each week - with around 50 shelves, you'd be done in a year. It allows staffers to give each shelf attention - as it is, no customer or staffer gives the shelves any attention, because there are just too many to look at in a few minutes; but with one shelf to deal with, the books could actually be sorted, or one could be designated that week's pick of the litter, etc. It lets people handle the selection in bite-sized chunks. It is dirt-cheap - there surely are some pyromaniacs on campus who will do the burning for free. It guarantees that the L. Ron Hubbard novels there will meet the fate they so richly deserve for being so terrible. It is dead-easy to implement.  And so on.

Librarians! This proposal is an improvement over the status quo. Come on - let's go burn some books.