What a terribly embarrassing topic! I write this secluded, with little prospect of anyone else reading it, and I can feel myself blushing just typing the word 'masturbation'.

But perhaps this will dispel it: I masturbate. You masturbate. We do it roughly daily, and usually once a week. If we don't, it's because we're having sex with someone, or are incapable. We do it thinking of specific persons, we do it thinking of nothing in particular, we do it to porn, we do it without. Males masturbate, females masturbate. I don't know about the rest of us, but I suspect they do *something*.

Now that's said, masturbation is an interesting topic from a practical viewpoint. It is a mechanism that reaches right into one of the most primal and powerful drives. It's no surprise that it's a daily or even more frequent occurrence. Indeed, I have difficulty describing even those people who masturbate, say, 7 or 8 times a day (the 'compulsive masturbators') as suffering from a sort of addiction; I feel as if I'd then have to begin analyzing 'melatonin addiction' (some people sleep several times a day!) or 'glucose addiction' (some people eat multiple times a day!).

If we adopt this cold-blooded or practical view, different questions arise. How do we best manage masturbation? What is the optimal schedule? When should we masturbate? Right before we go to sleep seems like a good idea, but perhaps masturbation is like tea in the morning - a good way to start the day.

For that matter, perhaps if we are disciplined, the ideal would be no masturbation whatsoever. Not because of any moral or cultural reason, but because it lets us get more important things to do. I am aware of no hard facts on the topic, but consider: one of the explanations postulated to explain the commonplace of the great artist who is gay is that such an artist can find little to no sexual satisfaction conventionally, and their masturbating is insufficient for a lifetime; thus, they divert their libido into other channels such as their art. And certainly they are not spending hours acquiring and consuming pornography or lovers. Normal heterosexuals can find conventional satisfaction, and thus their energy is diverted. A small difference perhaps, but the difference might compound over the years. And art is often a winner-take-all scenario.

The suggestion that ceasing masturbation would assist in one's endeavors is certainly not original (I first noticed it in _Cryptonomicon_, but I have seen it elsewhere). I am not certain what lesson to draw from my own experience. I once, on a lark, stopped masturbating for 2 weeks - much as I sometimes stop consuming caffeine, that I might see what my life is like without. (My fear is that I might become so accustomed to caffeine that I cannot function normally, like some sad cases I have seen.) The first week saw little change, besides some restlessness on my part. But midway through the second week, I happened to pass through the local shopping mall on some errand or other, and I was shocked. I couldn't stop looking at all the girls and women! Obsessively I stared, undressing them in my mind and further. Before this, I looked at women, certainly, but there was never an issue of whether I could stop. But this time was different; even averting my gaze did not permit me my equilibrium. I hurried out, with considerable food for thought. I did not notice any increase in my output or motivation.

Was the issue my age and hormones? My lack of romantic attachments? A flaw in my implementation? An insufficient trial period?

Perhaps the issue was that I had nothing in particular to do; the examples of great artists and the two relevant characters in _Cryptonomicon_ all had difficult goals and considerable drive.

I suspect this might be like the 'space repetition effect' for learning; real and effective, but so subtle it requires quantification and long-term consideration.