My major experiment the summer of 2009 was experimenting with various polyphasic sleep schedules. I am perfectly aware that the scientific evidence by Dr. Stampi and others for polyphasic sleep as a workable sleep schedule is weak, and that a reduced biphasic sleep schedule is probably the only workable alternative. But my schedule permitted it and I've long been curious - so I tried.

One of the issues with polyphasic sleep was that I began with the Uberman Schedule, which permits only 20 minutes. I timed myself. To put on pajamas, fluff my pillow, remove my accoutrements, wrap my scarf around my eyes, and painstakingly arrange my blankets so that I could comfortably sleep on my side - it all took the better part of 10 minutes even when I did not dawdle. This was unacceptable. The lure of Uberman was that the 6 naps of 20 minutes a piece meant you only spent 2 hours a day on sleeping, not 8 or 9. At 10 minutes to actually close my eyes, I would either be forced to have only 1 hour of sleep (and not even the most enthusiastic advocates claim 1 hour is sustainable) or I would be forced to spend a full hour a day just in dressing up and dressing down - bloating the sleep portion of my schedule by 50%.

Unacceptable. Just unacceptable. I had to optimize this process.

The first thing to go was sleeping on my side. I've side-slept all my life, but not for any particular reason. I have come to appreciate that there are in fact disadvantages to side-sleeping as compared to sleeping on my back. (Sleeping on my stomach is right out; I have yet to figure out how to breathe easily.) For example, to side sleep comfortably I require a number of blankets and a good soft pillow; otherwise I am not propped up and supported sufficiently. These blankets then impose a cost which is particularly acute in the summer: they keep one warm, very warm indeed, and one can easily wake up smelly and with mussed-up hair. Side-sleeping cannot be done anywhere, while if you are accustomed to sleeping on your back, you can simply lie down & use a book as a pillow or something.

So I determined to break my habit of side-sleeping and become a back-sleeper. It was not easy, but I persisted and now I lapse only occasionally.

The interesting aspect of back-sleeping from this summer's perspective is my last point: you do not always need a soft pillow. The back of your head is hard bone and cushioned by hair in a way the side of your head (with its squishy ears) is not. So you can get away with a pillow which is not soft, or indeed a pillow which is quite hard. Here was an opportunity to remove not just the elaborate arrangement of blankets, but also the adjustment of the pillow. I decided: I would investigate wooden pillows!

Wooden pillows are an unusual topic. As widely read as I am, I have come across mentions rarely: in a few Buddhist monk contexts, as relics of the ancient Egyptians, as devices employed by Japanese women to preserve their elaborate coifs, and curiously in a Chinese context, porcelain pillows were common[1]. But my preliminary searches turned out very few mentions or studies. This is a little odd; intuitively I would expect that such pillows be well-studied as they are durable enough to survive centuries and they have clear practical utility as far as portability and cleanliness go (what pillow could be easier to clean than a porcelain one?).

Having become a back-sleeper, I began looking for some manner of 'hard' pillow that I would not have to wash or adjust. But the lack of popularity meant that information, much less plans or products, was scarce indeed. I found a few links, and one or two offerings of wooden orthopedic pillows. But naught else.

I had no choice but to make my own. My first prototype was very simple. I took a long wooden pole left over from my family's tree house and I cut off a half-meter segment. The pole was roughly circular with a planed top and bottom (so it was roughly a hexagon), with a radius of approximately 12 centimeters. I then slept on it as usual, with my head wrapped in a scarf.

Those naps were terrible! I couldn't figure out how to sleep on it. The few pictures I'd seen did not indicate any special well or bump for the back of the head to actually rest on, so I just left the top flat. I couldn't put the back of my head flat down because my head would loll to the side, or my muscle tension would keep me awake, or my head lain sideways would crush my ear. I tried moving the pillow down my neck. Perhaps the pillow was supposed to fit in the gap between shoulder and lower-back-head. That did not work either. The edges abraded both my shoulders and my head still lolled from side to side.

I began sanding it down, pushing into the center so as to form a dip (when seen from the side) or a depression (seen from above) for my head to naturally be in. After several weeks, this had worked better - I was at least getting decent sleep - but it still was less satisfactory than a normal pillow.

Finally, I decided to revamp the design completely. For my second prototype, I took a second section from the pole, and I lashed it to the first section lengthwise. These two segments left between them a considerable depression, a void, V-shaped from the side. I began sanding vigorously, and began approximating two quarter-circles instead of two pointy lines. The lashing I modified and added some wraps lengthwise along the gap, forming a sort of net or hammock between the two segments.

This arrangement has proven to be much better.

My final step was to simply abandon pajamas. If I'm only sleeping for 20 or 30 minutes, it's really not worth the effort. So my current routine is down to about a minute. I lie down, set the alarm, take off my glasses, and wrap the scarf around my head. Satisfactory.

In the future, I think I'd like the third version to be a single piece of wood as the lashing loosens every couple of weeks. This wasn't a big deal when I was undoing it every day to sand the blocks, but is more annoying when I'm not modifying it. The purpose was to do less maintenance, not more!

[1] A very nice ceramic pillow in the form of a tiger: <http://www.artsmia.org/education/teacher-resources/pnt-objectinfocus.cfm?v=84>.