So on Christmas I finally got a [Zeo](!Wikipedia). A Zeo is basically an alarm clock with a wireless scaled-down [EEG](!Wikipedia) sensor-headband. The EEG data is processed to estimate whether one is asleep and what [stage](!Wikipedia "Sleep#Sleep stages") of sleep one is in. Zeo breaks sleep down into wake, REM, light, and deep. The phases aren't necessarily that distinct.

The data is much better than what you would get from more popular methods like cellphones with accelerometers, since an accelerometer only knows if you are moving or not, which isn't a very reliable indicator of sleep. (You could just be lying there staring at the ceiling, wide awake. Or perhaps the cat is kneading you while you are in light sleep.) As well, half the interest is how exactly sleep phases are arranged and how long the cycles are; you could use that information to devise [a custom polyphasic schedule](http://blog.myzeo.com/sleeping-round-the-clock-a-polyphasic-experiment/) or just figure out a better nap length than the rule-of-thumb of 20 minutes.

I personally want the data for a few distinct purposes:

1. quantifying the benefits of [melatonin]()
2. quantifying the benefits of [modafinil]()
3. testing benefits of [huperzine-A](!Wikipedia)
4. designing & starting [polyphasic sleep](!Wikipedia)[^ferriss]
5. assisting [lucid dreaming](!Wikipedia)
6. reducing sleep time in general (better & less sleep)

Christmas morning, I unpacked it and admired the packaging, and then looked through the manual. The base-station/alarm-clock seems pretty sturdy and has a large clear screen. The headband seemed comfortable enough that it wouldn't bother me. The various writings with it seemed rather fluffy and preppy, but I did my technical homework before hand, so could ignore their crap.

Late that night (quite late, since the girls stayed up playing _[Fable 3](!Wikipedia)_ and Xbox [Kinect](!Wikipedia) dancing games and what not), I turn in wearily. I had noticed that the alarm seemed to be set for ~3:30 AM, but I was very tired from the long day and taking my melatonin, and didn't investigate further - I mean, what electronic would ship with the alarm both enabled and enabled for a bizarre time? It wasn't worth bothering the other sleeper by turning on the light and messing with it. I put on the headband, verified that the Zeo seemed to be doing stuff, and turned in.

Come 3 AM, and the damn music goes off! I hit snooze, too discombobulated to figure out how to turn off the alarm.

So that explains the strange Zeo data for the first day:

TODO

The major surprise in this data was how quickly I fell asleep: TODO minutes. I had always thought that I took much longer to fall asleep, more like 45 minutes, and had budgeted accordingly. The rest of the data seemed too messed up by the alarm to learn anything from.

One possible application for Zeo was meditation. If it's measuring via EEG, then presumably it's learning something about how relaxed and activity-less one's mind is. I'm not seeking enlightenment, just calmness, which would seem to be in the purview of an EEG signal. (As Charles Babbage said. errors made using insufficient data are still less than errors made using no data at all.) But alas, I meditated for a solid 25 minutes and the Zeo stubbornly read at the same wake level the entire time; I then read my [Donald Keene](!Wikipedia) book, _Modern Japanese diaries: the Japanese at home and abroad as revealed through their diaries_, for a similar period with no change at all. It is possible that the 5-minute averaging (Zeo measures every 2 seconds) is hiding useful changes, but probably it's simply not picking up any real differences. Oh well!

The second night I had set the alarm to a more reasonable time, and also enabled its smart alarm mode, where the alarm will go off up to 30 minutes early if you are ever detected to be awake or in light sleep (as opposed to REM or deep sleep). One thing I forgot to do was take my melatonin; I keep my supplements in the car and there was a howling blizzard outside. It didn't bother me since I am not addicted to melatonin.

In the morning, the smart alarm mode seemed to work pretty well. I woke up early in a good mode, thought clearly and calmly about the situation - and went back to sleep. (It's a holiday, after all.)

The data looked much better than the first night, except for a big 2-hour gap where I vaguely recall the sensor headband having slipped off. (I don't think it was because it was uncomfortable but due to shifting positions or something.) Judging from the cycle of sleep phases, I think I lost data on a REM peak. The REM peaks interest me because it's a standard theory of polyphasic sleeping that thriving on 2 or 3 hours of sleep a day is possible because REM is the only phase that truly matters, and REM can dominate sleep time through [REM rebound](!Wikipedia) and training.

TODO

Besides that, I noticed that time to sleep was TODO minutes that night. Perhaps the excess time was thanks to the lack of melatonin. Since I've begun this inadvertent experiment, I'll try continuing it, alternating days of melatonin usage. I claim in my melatonin article that usage seems to save about 1 hour of sleep/time, but there's several possible avenues. One could be quicker to fall asleep; one could awake fewer times; and one could have greater percentage of REM or deep sleep, reducing light sleep. (Light sleep doesn't seem very useful; I sometimes feel worse after light sleep.)

During the afternoon, I took a quick nap. I'm not a very good napper, it seems - only the first 5 minutes registered as even light sleep.

[^ferriss]: I had previously [tried](Nootropics#huperzine-a) huperzine-A and found no effect from it, but I had no way of really noticing any effect on sleep, and [Timothy Ferriss](!Wikipedia) in his _The Four-hour Body_ claims:

    > "Taking 200 milligrams of huperzine-A 30 minutes before bed can increase total REM by 20 –30%. Huperzine-A, an extract of Huperzia serrata, slows the breakdown of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. It is a popular nootropic (smart drug), and I have used it in the past to accelerate learning and increase the incidence of lucid dreaming. I now only use huperzine-A for the first few weeks of language acquisition, and no more than three days per week to avoid side effects. Ironically, one documented side effect of overuse is insomnia. The brain is a sensitive instrument, and while generally well tolerated, this drug is contraindicated with some classes of medications. Speak with your doctor before using."
